SEBASTIAN VOGELSANG: All right,
let's go.
My name is Sebastian Vogelsang.
I'm from Berlin, Germany.
I'm wearing kind of two hats today, as I've been
doing for the last year, I think, almost.
First off, I'm the founder of Birdsong Apps, which is
super creative since it's just the English translation of my last
name.
I had to make that choice overnight.
That company has published two apps.
The first one is Skeets.
Skeet is a term that is short for SkyTweet,
for those of you familiar.
It is a-- it was
the first native iOS app, the first-- the first iPad app for
Blue Sky, and the first, and so far, I think, one of
the only really accessible apps for Blue Sky.
Sorry?
For visually impaired people?
SEBASTIAN VOGELSANG: Yes.
No, no, also for motoric impairment, but also for visually impaired
people.
Thank you, Ivan.
SEBASTIAN VOGELSANG: So, yes.
Those are the two apps that Birdsong apps has published.
The other hat I'm wearing today is for Eurosky, and
that's what I want to talk to you about today.
For the next slide, content warning, disturbing image.
Children, maybe cover her eyes.
SEBASTIAN VOGELSANG: This is
from January 25.
SEBASTIAN VOGELSANG: Yes.
SEBASTIAN VOGELSANG: For those
of you not familiar, this is Bezos, Zuckerberg, Pich
ai, Musk.
SEBASTIAN VOGELSANG: Does anybody
know where this is?
SEBASTIAN VOGELSANG: Probably, right?
OK.
So this is the front row at Trump's inauguration.
And in the weeks that followed this event, a lot of these
platforms took drastic decisions.
Meta ended its fact-checking.
So basically, on this day, Big Tech, they didn't just comply
with stuff.
They basically raced to the front of the room.
And since then, the US administration has increasingly targeted independent media.
And with X, this had already been started two years at this
point, being used as a political instrument, not only in the US,
but also in Europe, where Musk tried to influence elections, not only
in Germany, but I think also in Hungary.
And we need to ask ourselves, when Musk acquired Twitter, what was
actually captured here?
SEBASTIAN VOGELSANG: It wasn
't a company.
And it wasn't an algorithm.
It was actually infrastructure.
The pipes that your media and your journalism runs on, the identity
layer, the distribution layer, the moderation layer, all captured overnight by one
acquisition.
When you look at companies like X, this is what the stack
currently looks like.
You have identity storage.
You have distribution.
You have moderation.
You have apps and interfaces.
And when you combine all this in one company, in one stack,
that's not just an app.
That's infrastructure with a product on top.
And try to democratically govern this right now.
Identity verification, ranking, advertiser relationships, speech rights across jurisdictions, moderation
appeals, data privacy, et cetera, all at once, all in one place.
And the complexity is actually the point here.
The monolith protects itself by being too tangled to just regulate.
And we see this in Europe right now on an everyday basis
where the EU government tries to regulate big tech and just can
't.
Thinking back to Trump's inauguration, you now have this concentrated,
unaccountable power over public discourse.
And we've seen it.
And we've watched it happen again.
And my wife told me not to make this reference.
But I'm from Germany.
And this matters to me.
Sorry, so what does democratic infrastructure actually look like?
Well, it turns out we sort of have an answer to this
from another area.
And that's public broadcasting.
What you see here is a map of national media landscape in
Germany after World War II, in which the regional broadcasters
had all been merged into one national network by the Nazis to
create a powerful means of propaganda.
The allies insisted on a decentralized independent structure for German public broadcasting.
They created these regional public broadcasting agencies that, by and large, still
exist today.
All these services are mainly financed through license fees paid by
every household in Germany.
And they are governed by councils of representatives of the socially relevant
groups.
And Catherine will be happy to talk to you about that if
you want to know more.
Because she has been doing that for years.
So what was built here is infrastructure that cannot be captured by
government or by money.
And we need to do that again for social media.
When we think about-- I stole this from Robin, by the way.
When we think about social media, we usually have the wrong mental
model.
We usually think it's like this, everybody's happy, social media
apps are like fun, and we can just like post memes on
them.
But the actual right model analogy is this, it's roads.
They're hard to replace.
They have many downstream users.
And whoever owns these roads sets the rules for everyone on them.
So the people owning these rules have the durable power over everything
that moves on them.
You all, or most of you, have knowledge of the protocol that
we're talking about at this conference, the ATO protocol.
And you know what the pieces are.
And you also know how open protocols like ATProto let
you operate these components independently of each other, thus guaranteeing that
there will be not too much power in one corner, right?
And I've witnessed this empowerment myself last year when I built
the app I talked about, Flashes, which is sort of a
visual social media on ATProto.
Some say it's an Instagram clone.
I was able to take advantage-- screw those people, right?
I was able to take advantage of BlueSky's existing
infrastructure here.
And thus, I didn't have to rebuild identity, social graph, distribution.
And I could just focus on the user experience.
But when it came to the stuff that wasn't covered by
BlueSky or their app view, like moderation for my own
custom lexicons in there, I either had the choice to
build this on my own, put money in it, raise capital, or
actually do it the protocol way and get together with people and
find a common solution that everybody can use.
And luckily, I chose the latter and joined forces with Ivan and
Robin and Sharif, who were previously working on FreeR feeds.
I don't know if you talked about this, but it was
an initiative that set out last year to promote ATProto
outside of the realm of the inner BlueSky ecosystem.
And this is how Eurosky and the model foundation got founded.
Eurosky isn't an app or a platform.
It's not a competitor to anything you're building here.
It's shared infrastructure for the ATProto ecosystem.
It's operated in Europe, under EU law, and we're aiming
at providing developers, like myself, with the same benefits that I got
to enjoy when I built on the back of BlueSky
's infrastructure.
Like right now, we're providing PDSs, relays, we
're working on agnostic app views and moderation pipelines, and
all that as European commons, not as a US commercial product.
So here's why we think it's necessary for Europe.
We like to say we can just build things, but this is
what happens when you just build things in Europe.
We got this the first week after we unofficially launched
our PDS, and it reads to the privacy officer under Article
15 of the General Data Protection Regulation, GDPR, I am
requesting a copy of all personal data you hold about me associated
with this email address.
Please provide me the information in a commonly used electronic format with
a statutory one-month period.
And as a developer, you can either try to handle this on
your own, and if you know the GDPR, you're probably
able to do this, but there are already a lot of apps
out there that just don't deploy to Europe because they are
afraid of this.
So you either know how to handle this or you just skip
Europe.
I mean, obviously, you should not save too much data for the
clients that you provide.
You shouldn't like lock IP addresses if it's not necessary,
but this is something that I myself had to like learn over
years dealing with GDPR because this also didn't happen overnight
in Europe.
Right?
So, of course, where your infrastructure runs determines what laws apply to
it.
So GDPR, DSA, data residency with Eurosky,
this will all be handled at the infrastructure layer.
So you just build your app, and we handle the compliance, plumbing,
and give you the European market actually at scale without routing data
through the US.
Talking about the stack, we just soft launched our PDS.
We worked through the preregistration list, and we're
almost at 2,000-- oh, no, 9,000 users migrate.
I think we're by now the largest third-party PDS
in the atmosphere except for the bridging PDS for the
Fediverse, and we managed to do this within two weeks.
Why isn't this-- two weeks?
Yeah.
This was with invites only, like with invite codes, so it's
not even publicly launched yet.
We managed to pull this off by implementing our own migration tool,
and we called it EU Hall.
Thank you.
Why?
We're ready to rename it at any time.
So the thing is, when we ran tests with the existing tools
out there, which are awesome-- I want to put this down-- Bailey
built PDSMover, which is a phenomenal tool-- but we
saw drop-off rates of up to 50% with the users
we tested it with, and not because the existing migration solution isn
't bad or anything, but because we're actually dealing with non-
tech-savvy users, right, that are used to starting processes
and closing their window or closing the laptop when they started it,
and then the migration fails.
So we decided to ship something server-based that would continue running
in the background, while not invading your privacy more than necessary.
For example, we encrypt the tokens that we generate for the
transfer during the migration, delete them right after.
We're all GDPR-conformant, so yeah.
I think it worked pretty well.
So that was EU Hall.
Now to something that we'd like to premiere here today.
This isn't public yet?
Yeah.
One more thing.
Like I said, we're not trying to be the next Twitter
or X for Europe, but rather a portal to the atmosphere.
So to reflect that, Emilia, who I'm saying hi to
on stream, she's in Berlin, who most of you know from
the ecosystem, has built something for us that we're going to
be launching really soon, and that will let anyone experience what this
ecosystem is about.
It will look something like this.
This will be Eurosky's portal site, so you
can either create your Eurosky account there.
We'll let users set up new accounts without going through the
usual apps, so they can do it right there.
We'll get rid of the invite codes.
You can obviously just log into your accounts.
Goes without saying, given that Emilia worked on it, it's
relying 100% on OAuth.
And this is what it will look like for now when onboard
ing.
As you will see, we are not going to give you our
own content there, but we will rather feature all the applications that
are active on the atmosphere.
So all of your applications will be in that board, so people
can jump right into any of these applications and will start featuring
applications.
Of course, since it's Eurosky, we'll have
like a European section to feature European apps.
But essentially, we're trying to give people access, fast access, quick
access to the tools that are already out there, instead of trying
to build our own.
So we hope by doing this and explaining what each app is
and what it does, that we'll get more traction to these
apps.
Oh, thank you.
A little preview of what's coming afterwards.
We're currently setting up a PLC mirror and a relay,
and that should be ready to go in the coming weeks.
Next on our list would be an app view, very much like
Blue Skies or Black Skies app view, because we believe
that social media data can already incubate so many applications that
deal with followers, likes, and posts.
So I think it's in a public interest to have an
app view that can serve all these different apps that we already
have today.
But we're also looking at a talk to chat yesterday running,
for example, slices or -- sorry -- constellation mirrors or gazetteers for
ATGeo projects.
So if you have something that you think is public infrastructure or
should be public infrastructure, come talk to us.
And we'll see if we can make it happen and make
it run for everybody on our infrastructure.
In parallel, we'll start working on compliance pipelines for developers.
Ultimately, the goal is to have a sort of shared moderation experience
for app developers that share certain lexicons.
And we're currently talking to Roost over there about integrating
Co-op and Osprey for this.
So, yeah, this will be the step after the next step.
EuroSky is also participating in two European tenders right
now.
One is called Social Pets, and it will implement a couple
of things, one of which is a privacy-preserving training and
inference for decentralized social media recommender algorithms.
It will also -- I'm reading this because I cannot remember it --
the other one is quantum-resistant privacy-preserving zero-know
ledge credentials for age-gating, reputation, and anti-abuse without
tracking.
And the last one will be privacy-preserving trust and safety
collaboration across relays and servers via multiparty computation.
This will let different instances in the network signal abuse signals to
each other without exposing private data.
We're hoping to hear from that.
It's an EU Horizon grant.
These things take months to apply for, and then it takes the
double amount of months for them to decide whether you get it
or not.
So, we've been waiting for six months.
This would be awesome.
The other tender we're currently working on with TU Dres
den, and with the advisory of GreenEarth, namely Rene
Diresta, Glenn Weil, and Jonathan Stray.
And the goal with this one will be to develop a production
pro-social feed, basically a bridging algorithm that creates engagement without
polarization.
And that will then be open sourced and incorporated into our
Eurosky infrastructure and thus be made available to anyone who builds
on Eurosky and who wants to have a good recommender
algorithm in their app.
Yeah, we started this talk with infrastructure being captured.
So, how do we make sure that Eurosky cannot be captured
and screw us all?
Well, Ivan kind of laid it out already.
The mentioned components are all embedded in this nonprofit, the Modal
Foundation, and that's not because we couldn't raise capital, but
because public infrastructure must not be embedded in like one company whose
incentives could diverge from the ecosystem's needs.
And this is not a criticism of anyone building in this space
in that way.
I think it's just good infrastructure design.
Basically, the same logic as public broadcasting.
So, no single point of capture.
And that includes us.
So, we're making ourselves accountable to the mission.
And we can't be sold from under the people who depend
on it.
The business model, we don't need to talk about that, right?
Well, okay.
It will be grants for now and funding by the EU later.
Furthermore, we're looking at services running on our infrastructure that can
then maybe back finance our expenses.
That is the general direction for now.
And like I said, at our launch event in November last year,
we'll be interoperable with all of you all, all
of the other people building on this right now.
We'll even bridge to Mastodon.
So, we're not asking anyone to choose any of these platforms.
We're just adding a layer that makes the whole network stronger
and more legally resilient, more accessible to builders who need European compliance.
If you want to meet us, this will be the next opportunity.
Yes.
We'll be in Amsterdam, June 4th, 5th, and 6
th of June.
And we're doing this together with New Public, who is presented
over there.
Then, of course, the AtmosphereConf, SafeSocial, the
FETI Forum, and the ZDF, which is a
public broadcaster from Germany.
And with that, I thank you.
And we have, like I anticipated, 10 minutes for questions.
Excellent.
Thank you very much.
Questions from the room.
Go ahead and start putting up your hands and
we'll get ready.
I already have a question here from the chat.
So, just shouting out to the chat here.
Coming from artwo.
xyz, it's the under the EU law part that is
not really reassuring.
If you make an app view, how the ID verification will be
handled.
Interesting.
We don't know yet because we're waiting for legislation to
pass and see how it happens.
But we're not alone in this.
Ultimately, we're talking about the youth ban in social media.
And that's still a very recent and very hot topic that
we kind of have to wait for.
I mean, there are techniques on a zero knowledge base to solve
this kind of stuff.
We definitely don't want to have, like, copies of IDs on
our servers.
So, like I said, we're talking to people to find good
solutions for this.
But, like, my personal opinion is, ultimately, I think in the end
this will, like, meta will win with the lobbying they did to
push this to Apple and Google.
As we saw by the lobbying numbers from two presentations ago.
Exactly.
How much money they're pouring into this.
It will probably end up there.
It will suck for the open web.
So, anything in between, we're currently too small.
We can just, like, look for solutions once we're faced with
them to somehow comply with it and see what we can do
to not screw everybody.
No.
That might not be a concluding answer, but it's definitely
not.
It's definitely a better answer than -- I can add something.
Oh, you can add something?
Oh, yes, please.
Let me get you the mic.
No, just to add to what Sebastian was saying.
We've been talking to a number of, like, lawmakers who are
considering age verification, you know, social media bans for teens and
all that.
They, a lot of the time, understand the downsides of these
things.
They understand that it doesn't work.
But there's tremendous popular pressure to do something.
Yeah.
And they don't see what else they can do.
And so, the reason I'm bringing this up is that folks
in this room, like ourselves, who see other things that could happen,
it's on us to, like, make the effort of, like, you
know, figuring that shit out, explaining it, writing it up, et cetera,
et cetera.
Because if we give them solutions, they will be interested in, like,
you know, picking them up.
Everyone knows that in Australia, it's not working at all.
Yeah.
So, like, it's not like it's a surprise.
And, I mean, the ultimate goal would be to regulate big tech
's algorithms.
And this is the goal that everybody tries to follow, at least
in Europe.
But, you know, politics.
U.
S.
politics, tariffs, all that is in the way of just regulating right
now.
So, the governments kind of jump ahead now, the country's governments
in Europe, and start with these, with kind of trying to move
the most vulnerable out of the way.
We'll see.
All right.
Just so we make sure that we get everybody out of here
early enough to go over to the big thing.
So, Jay, Paul and Jay, and you can hear about how Jay
's going to blue sky, blue sky.
It's going to be very exciting.
Let's just finish off with one last question here from Catherine.
So, Sebastian, just for my usual question is, I don't really
understand.
So, Eurosky isn't like blue sky for Europeans.
It looks like what I'm seeing is like a window into
all the other apps that have been already created.
You're not replicating a blue sky experience on Eur
osky or a Gander experience on Eurosky.
Imagine blue sky without the app.
Like everything that blue sky is without the app.
So, don't you think though Europeans would have like a pent
up demand feeling for wanting to have their own blue sky?
There will be apps that -- But you're not building that.
You guys aren't building that.
And why not?
I don't understand why not.
Eurosky brand.
We're not.
I mean, we already have -- Hi.
So, Sebastian already has built two of them.
And you can use them today.
And there are others.
And we are -- there's a whole other development pipeline that's --
The hanging man.
We have in our development pipeline the idea for lots of different
apps and potentially a venture studio that would support lots of people
to do lots of different kinds of building.
We are not at present seeking to build a blue sky clone.
If that's your question.
But maybe in the future.
But that's, you know, that means running a microblogging
business, as you know.
And other people are free to do so.
And you can use your Eurosky handle to log
in and all that lovely stuff.
Interoperability.
Yay.
Excellent.
Okay.
We're going to shut it down here and let you guys
get over to the next room.
Thank you once again to Sebastian.
Thank you.
Woo!